[Music in the background]
Speaker 1: Gonna stall- stall for a little bit.
Unknown: Just keep talking.
Speaker 1: Hello folks, how is everyone doing? Today we're celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Smithsonian Folklife festival here on the mall. Fifty years of Folklife Festival.
Speaker 1: Keep you in mind, we have circus arts, you can hear that [?calliope], that's going on for a little while.
Speaker 1: We'll have on the move -- personal meets the political, with policy considerations and personal narratives coming up really soon.
Speaker 1: So, stay hydrated, hang out with folks, we'll be here soon.
Speaker 1: Feel free to move up -- we have a lot of spaces. Feel free to move up to the next section, please.
[Music plays]
Speaker 1: Yeah? Have a seat. Come on up, come move forward. It's 4th of July, it's hot, but you know. You keep your mind cool, then you can weather through it.
Speaker 1: So uh, where is everyone from today? [laughs]
[Music continues]
Speaker 1: If you folks haven't already visited the art and industries building, it's just right across the mall, next to the castle.
Speaker 1: There's a marketplace there, you can buy all kinds of incredible musical gifts, books, artifacts, textiles, jewelry -- all kinds of great stuff there.
Speaker 1: Um, a lot of it is also featured by the heritage fellows that have been performing with us and been featured.
Speaker 1: So, make sure you make your way over to the marketplace today.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I like this music. That's good, keep that going, yeah.
[Music continues]
Perla Guerrero: Good afternoon, can everyone hear me? Hello! [Laughs] Uh, I am Perla Guerrero.
Perla Guerrero: I am assistant professor of American Studies and Latino Studies at the University of Maryland at College Park.
Perla Guerrero: and I am a scholar of race, labor, and migration, so it's my pleasure to be here to facilitate this panel discussion, um, "Intersection of Personal Stories and Immigration Policy."
Perla Guerrero: So, I'm going to let everyone introduce themselves, but the idea behind this panel is to get a little bit more information about immigration, displacement, movement, something beyond the typical, kind of expected story of looking for a better life,
Perla Guerrero: because policy is very important in defining who can enter the country,
Perla Guerrero: who can not, who can stand in a so-called line,
Perla Guerrero: who can quote-unquote "do it the right way."
Perla Guerrero: Um, a quick little bit of information is just that there are usually numerical limits on countries of origin.
Perla Guerrero: And, there are different numbers for different countries, there are different considerations, depending on if there's an environmental disaster if there's a war
Perla Guerrero: the US, the United States, position on a war, determines whether people being displaced by war are actually recognized as refugees or not.
Perla Guerrero: In this area, some of you may know that there are a lot of Center American Americans,
Perla Guerrero: um, that were displaced due to civil wars in El Salvador, Nicaragua, in Guatemala,
Perla Guerrero: but many of them were not ever recognized as refugees, meaning that they had to enter as undocumented immigrants,
Perla Guerrero: and so they have US citizen children, em,um, but they're divided along legal status and documented citizen.
Perla Guerrero: Right, that's because the US didn't recognize a lot of the civil wars and so thus didn't assign them a category of refugees.
Perla Guerrero: So I'm gonna let everyone introduce themselves and we're gonna start with Brenda Pérez Amador and then Kumera Genet and then Ted Gong.
Perla Guerrero: And I've asked them to share a little bit about themselves, who they are and a little bit about their family's migration story.
Brenda Perez: Thank you! So thank you everybody for being here. My name is Brenda Perez. I'm originally from Mexico, but I've been in D.C. for pretty much half of my life.
Brenda Pérez: So I'm kind of like a Mexican Washingtonian. And right now I'm studying at the University of the District of Columbia.
Brenda Pérez: I'm doing civil engineering as my major. And I'm also a youth activist here in D.C.
Brenda Pérez: I do campaigns for language access to give quality education for English language learners in the D.C. public system and I also do a lot of campaigning towards immigration reform.
Brenda Pérez: And the main reason why I came to the United States was because there were a lot of family issues.
Brenda Pérez: Uh back in Mexico, the- we're still right now the police is very corrupt, and the government is really corrupt as well.
Brenda Pérez: So, my dad worked for the police department and he started to become so corrupt that that kind of mentality that he had in the workplace started to follow into the home.
Brenda Pérez: So he started to be very abusive, uh not very supportive financially or emotionally.
Brenda Pérez: So my mom, being the strong woman that she is, she said, "I can't live with you anymore. I have to take my children with me."
Brenda Pérez: So we lived with my grandmother, uh for a couple of years until my mom faced another challenge where she couldn't find work.
Brenda Pérez: And ten years ago, or eleven years ago, it was really hard for women to find work in Mexico.
Brenda Pérez: Especially since she didn't have a college education and she was a single mother.
Brenda Pérez: It's very typical back in our home countries, when you go to an interview they ask you, "Are you married?" or "How many children do you have?"
Brenda Pérez: because they kind of wanna lay your intellectuality based on your husband or something like that.
Brenda Pérez: So it was very hard for her to find a job and she decided to come to the United States because this is where the dream was. um
Brenda Pérez: My father was here, uh, long before my gran- my mother came here so he was able to establish his space,
Brenda Pérez: a house and when my mom decided that she wanted to come he opened his house for us here in D.C.
Brenda Pérez: She came here and then two years later she decided that me and my siblings would come here as well,
Brenda Pérez: because things in Mexico were not looking as good. But yeah, that's a little bit about why I came here.
Kumera Genet: Alright, I am Kumera Zakarias Genet.
I'm from Austin, Texas originally. My family is from Ethiopia.
Both my parents came to the U.S in the early 1970s to mid-'70s.
My dad finished high school here in the United States.
He left Ethiopia in 1973 I believe, and
He was a student protester at the time.
He was protesting against the government Aile Salassie.
It was a very large student protest movement, and he was put in jail twice,
And there was a very palpable fear for his life when he left, um so through the missionary services,
He was able to find a way out of the country to go to school here to finish school and then uh eventually go to college
And then my mother came on a student visa.
So I grew up in Austin, Texas in a predominantly Mexican-immigrant and Mexican-American community
I've worked in education and youth development for 10 years.
First starting here in D.C in the Columbia Heights neighborhood in northwest D.C.
Most of my students and the families that I've worked with were from El Salvador, but there were also large populations of students from the Dominican Republic, African-American students, Ethiopian students, and Guyanese.
So it was a wonderful neighborhood.
Um it's changed a lot since when I first started working there and a lot of those families don't live there anymore.
But I've continued working in youth development, and now I'm at a national organization planning events
and writing curricula for first-generation college students and first-generation Americans.
[SILENCE]
Ted Gong:
So, so, my name is Ted Gong.
And, uh, I was born in the United States, so I didn't come here as an immigrant,
and in fact, I'm fourth or fifth-generation Chinese-American.
My great grandfather actually came working here at things like
He wasn't in the gold mines. He wasn't in the railroads.
He was out there shucking potatoes on the, in San Franciso Bay
and then my father, grandfather, and great grandfather were born here.
My mother came here after the war
as a bride of an American citizen.
Uh, you know my career is a little different from these people. I'm actually a retired foreign service officer.
I've been 30 years working with the state department and the U.S immigration service
and uh, most recently I've scouted out to[?] Homeland Security and Customs Border Protection
I've worked on the 1986-'89 reforms actually and worked on the most recent reforms
back before it was uh still being considered as passable before it collapsed completely
So right now I'm in charge of a foundation.
We call it the "1882 Foundation".
1882 is the year in which the first comprehensive immigration act was passed.
In the year 1882, Congress passed the law to prohibit Chinese from immigrating to the United States or becoming American citizens
Based purely on race.
You cannot come to the United States because you were Chinese.
Ah, my mother was affected by that. I can tell that story later for you.
But anyway, we created a foundation which is called the 1882 Foundation.
I'm the executive director, and what we do is we try to educate the public about the significance of the 1882 laws.
We want to talk about Chinese-American history.
We do this through all histories and preservations of historical sites.
Uh, we do workshops for teachers, curriculum reform,
try to introduce the topic of exclusion acts into the curriculum.
And we also do annual gatherings of museums, Asian-American museums, and historical societies, and try to share best practices.
So, I look forward to continuing this discussion with all of you.
Speaker 1: [?]
Wonderful, the next question that I thought we would talk about is a little bit about the context in the country or area of origin
Political issues, economic issues, environmental issues, um,
and if you have any ideas, um, about the relationship to the United States.
And Ted, since you just mentioned Chinese exclusion, and how your organization is trying to introduce that into curricula, I'm wondering if you can tell us a little bit more about that
Chinese exclusion in the United States, how Chinese immigrants were able to enter during exclusion
and then why you think it's important for, um, school-age children to learn that history, and then we'll kind of work our way down the panel. =
Ted Gong: So there's a whole host of issues there.
Everything from the very origins of immigration law, the whole immigration bureaucracy, the way we have as sort of an antagonist relationship between the applicant and the government workers.
All actually stems from the 1882 Act if you really wanna think about it.
In fact, not very many people know this but the mounted border patrol,
which we think about that's patrolling the Mexican border, was actually formed to prevent Chinese
from trying to sneak across from Mexico into the United States to avoid the 1882 laws.
The 1882 law was passed to do two things: prevent Chinese from immigrating to the United States by their race, prevent them from becoming American citizens also by race.
That law was renewed three times. In 1882 it was passed for 10 years.
And pay attention to some of the vocabulary that is used. It was meant to be a temporary exclusion.
Expediant thing. And it was approved 10 years later in 1892.
And then it was approved again 10 years later in 1902 and made permanent.
So, people talk about today about temporary visions of law they need to be a little bit of cautious of what that actually means.
The 1882 laws completely raced based was not rescinded until 1943, and in 1943 they rescind it because of uh United States was in the war with Japan and China was our ally.
So you couldn't really fight a war against fascism and say you those people that were your partners could not come to the United States.
So, the question then is how do people come? And despite the laws, my father was able to come,
different people were able to come, and we have things like people trying to pretend they were Amer-
you couldn't prevent Americans who people who were born in the United States bec- be American Citizens.
In fact, actually, the the birthright citizenship was determined by a Chinese exclusion case.
It was a case by a guy named Huang Kim Art, who was born in Modesto, California went to China,  and then came back.
And the Chinese uh immigration officials tried to exclude him because he shouldn't be-
he was born to immigrants of the United States who were not eligible, undocumented aliens. Right? They were undocumented people.
Right.
Ted Gong: So birthright citizenship was actually determined in a Supreme Court case brought to court by a Chinese person.
A Chinese person established the 14th Amendment was if you were born in the United States you are a citizen.
So, you need to be cautious too, that I think one of the most dangerous things that our face of the United,
immigration today is actually not totally the prohibition about people coming in [?United States] temporary but the attack on potential birthright citizenship.
So anybody is looking around right now and say we need to review that case cause the case in Supreme [?bout]
as a split decision actually, although for the hundred-plus years,
everyone assumes that birthright citizenship under the 14th Amendment is secure.
I think that if the Congress or other people want to pass a legislation that tests the case,
the purpose is to bring it to the Supreme Court for another decision of that.
There is a possibility that you're going to lose birthright citizenship.
Birthright citizenship is not something that many countries in the modern world actually have,
so it's not unusual for other countries to say we don't recognize birth simply by the fact that you're born within our territories,
so we need to be careful about those things, those implications are there.
So paper sons, undocumented people we now celebrate a lot of the people that come here pretend
that they are Americans or they had other citizenship.
My mother tried to come here when she was sixteen years old,
and she couldn't come in the United States she was held at Angel Island
which was an immigration detention center on San Francisco Bay.
They say it's the Ellis Island of the West,
but actually it was designed to detain and hold Chinese people to exclude them.
My mother came there in May 1937 on a ship. She came here by herself.
She stayed there for eleven months be sure she was deported back to China.
So she couldn't get in the United States.
And uh so uh that's something to think about in what we mean by who we exclude and how we can.
There's an immigration law I remember looking at now that says if you try the Indian United States
by pretending that you are American citizen then you are ineligible for life.
That's one of the provisions in our current immigration law.
But, and I thought to myself, you know if that law had been in place when my mother tried to enter
and she tried to enter when she was trying to pretend that she was another person that was born in the United States,
she would have been not able to come to the United States.
I would not be here. I wouldn't be here talking to you guys.
Right. Yeah. [[laughter]]
Anyway. That's some some background.
Yeah, thank you.
Um there is a book, for those of you interested, uh um on immigration in the West,
there is a book on Angel Island, and particularly um the way it was used to detain Asian immigrants that were trying to enter the United States,
and the other thing that Ted mentioned that I just wanted to really uh call your attention to
is the fact that when we talk about so-called "Anchor babies" today, children born to undocumented immigrants,
um it was an Asian American person that was the first "Anchor baby"
because that Supreme Court case was about whether that person was actually a U.S. citizen because he was born in the United States.
So we also need to think about the way in which ideas about race and immigration or immigrants change over time,
how we kind of displace our anxieties about race and difference or um the economy on to different groups of people at particular times.
Um, Kumera, I wonder if you could share a little bit about your-do you know about your family's-
like your parents'-how, they got their student visas, was it easy, was it difficult,
um do you have a sense of whether many other people had the same opportunity or
whether things just kind of lined up for your parents?
Kumera Genet:
Uh yeah. I can talk about that. Um, I don't know a lot, and I think that's common
Speaker 1: The process is very complicated.
What a lot of, I think, parents and particularly the Ethiopian community want to do,
there is a strong feeling of protecting your child.
Like, I was born here and so it's almost like this is just another burden as a parent
that I don't want to pass on to my child, right?
They never really wanted to get in the ins and outs of that and I found a couple of things.
My father actually passed away earlier this year,
and so I was looking through a lot of his documents and I found like, just this big box full of INS documents and stuff like that.
Going back to the early seventies, bank ledgers of when he was sending money back to Ethiopia when he was a student in college
And um, it's something that I think because of the, like I was saying,
the very strong need, um, for them to want their children, like myself, to assimilate
that there there isn't as much information shared.
I know more about my extended family who came as refugees
Speaker 2: Mhm.
Speaker 1: than I actually know about my parents.
A lot of my families who came to this area in particular, because I grew up in Texas,
a lot of my family members started coming to D.C. in the nineties.
And they were coming from Ethiopia by way of Kenya and Tanzania, so they were passing through Nairobi,
and then over there that's when they would get to the UNHCR Office, and so on that side of my family,
they come from a group called the Oromo people in Ethiopia who were for people who were
politically involved and families who were politically involved like mine
Number one, they had the access and the ability to leave the country and the privilege to be able to do that.
And number two, it was recognized in the East African UNHCR Policy,
the UN High Commission for Refugees that they were a targeted group
and so in that time period it was possible for them to get refugee papers and to come directly to the United States.
Speaker 2: Did they have to have sponsors in the U.S. as refugees?
Speaker 1: Mhmm, they did, and there was a previous generation.
Among Ethiopians, I don't want to make quick and hard rules here but Ethiopians first started coming to the D.C. area in the fifties,
many as students and diplomats.
The 60s and 70s, a lot more who were from more well-to-do families came to the area.
That includes my parents' generation and my parents' standing in Ethiopia at the time.
And then in the 80s when the Civil War started going on is when more people started coming as refugees.
And then in the 90s, that continued until the 90s and 2000s when a lot of refugees and also through the diversity visa program.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So the sponsors were the more well-to-do uncles cousins
Speaker 2: Mhm.
Speaker 1: or whoever who had made roots here earlier.
Speaker 2: Right. So um, for those of you that don't know,
when you are actually in a country abroad and you're actually recognized as a refugee, as a persecuted group,
the United Nations has to deem you a persecuted group.
Due to race, religion, ethnicity, that also is tied into larger issues around policy,
but once you actually are a refugee you have to then wait for a U.S. sponsor that takes financial responsibility for you and/or your family.
So in this case, aunties, uncles would say to U.S. Immigration service,
"I will sponsor, I will take on my niece, my nephew. I am financially responsible for them until they get on their feet.
I will enroll them in school. I will help them find a job."
Sometimes this changes, it fluctuates.
But one of the privileges of being a refugee, if you can call it that, even though people are fleeing war and terror and other issues is that the
U.S. Government does provide some services.
Uh classes- English-language classes, job training, possibly rent subsidies in addition to the spon- to the sponsor who takes on the
responsibility. This is one of the largest differences between refugees and undocumented immigrants.
Refugees have legal status, which means they can, if they can find a job, they can get a job.
Undocumented immigrants do not have a legal status in the United States,
which means they often have to break another law to get false documentation or work under the table.
So, and they also rely on family networks that unofficially kind of sponsor them, but there's no kind of safeguard in place.
So one of the other things that Kumera said that's really important is that largely speaking,
whether you're looking at Latin America, Cuba, Nigeria, the first cohorts,
the first and second cohorts of people fleeing political turmoil or economic crisis are the elite,
are the wealthy people of those countries.
For Cuba the Golden Exiles in the late fifties, 1960s were people with money.
Same thing for Nigeria. And you start to see the repercussions of this when their U.S.-born children become really successful. Right?
Those of you that are familiar with the idea of the model minority, it's like
"they did it, the rest of you poor people should be able to do it too".
A lot of the people that made it that are the children are actually children of very educated people in their countries of origin.
So they're the children of doctors or professionals in a way that a lot of undocumented children from
Laos, from Vietnam, from Thailand, from Mexico, Guatemala are not.
Their parents are not highly educated, in addition to the immigration issues that are present.
So that's also one of the things that really structures immigration in the United States,
is parents' educational obtainment in their country of origin,
whether they're literate in their native language on top of any legal issues present.
Um, what do you want to tell us a little bit about?
A little bit more about Mexico? Any kind of like, political issues?
You touched upon the kind of corruption, anything else you want to share about the context and kind of like,
as a push factor, right? Why people leave?
Speaker 3: So I think very generally, a lot of the stuff that happens here in the U.S. directly impacts Mexico.
So if the U.S. starts to have an immigration problem, then they kinda look at Mexico and they're like,
"well, it's your people." And then Mexico will say, "O.K. I don't think it's our people
but it's maybe like, people coming from other countries crossing Mexico to get to your country."
So we see a lot of that stuff.
Uh when when the U.S. started to have a lot of youth that coming here undocumented,
and this was a couple of years ago when they were coming from Central America,
and what Mexico did in retaliation to that I guess, is that the border patrol,
because Mexico also has a border patrol between Central America, Guatemala, and Mexico,
is that they started to reinforce it to prevent those people from coming into Mexico
so that Mexico kind of doesn't get blamed for these immigration issues.
Also a lot with drugs. When the U.S. needs drugs, or when they start to have a problem with drugs,
then Mexico gets pointed at it like "oh, well it's your people again".
And the government starts to take a lot of action into that.
They start to do a lot of more repercussions and more stuff but again,
the corruption in Mexico is due to a lot of that stuff, people taking power, so
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't really know much about Mexico. um, I only grew up there until I was 10 years old but all of that stuff is very, like, it prevails, it's so prevailing and it's a lot of stuff that is so very noticeable.
Speaker 1: Up to this date, um, my grandmother talks about all of the Salvadorians who come into our neighbourhood because, uh, we're in the capital.
Speaker 1: And she tells me stories about how they're also getting kicked out, how immigration is also looking for them,
Speaker 1: and how a lot of them have to work under the table in Mexico, and how a lot of them have very difficult issues trying to,
Speaker 1: uh, learn Spanish because believe it or not, a lot of the Central Americans that come in through Mexico most of them are from indigenous cultures,
Speaker 1: so Spanish may not necessarily be their first language.
Speaker 1: So, it's interesting to see how we have a lot of sim- like this immigration stuff and government corruption is very similar in Mexico and here in the United States.
Speaker 1: It's kinda like the same girl with the different dress, you know.
Speaker 1: Like, we still have language problems, immigration problems, there's a lot of racism, a lot of, um, language access problems and stuff like that.
Speaker 2: Thank you. Okay, final question for the panel now, we'll take some audience questions.
Speaker 2: Um, very quickly, is there anything else that you want the audience to know about?
Speaker 2: It can be about immigration, it can be about the- the personal meeting policy or your family's country of origin or area of origin,
Speaker 2: basically, what do you want the audience to know about that you might not get in our, you know, in very many other places? Does anybody have an idea?
Speaker 3: So, you know, I do want to sorta like, broaden the discussion a little bit. You know we talk about migration and we talk about immigration,
Speaker 3: we talk about them coming over here, uh and we try to understand the reasons for people to come.
Speaker 3: And I think it's very human for us to understand that these issues, whether it's government corruption, or war, or poverty, or whether- these are not things that that are just, that are alien to the United States.
Speaker 3: If you think about the mass migrations from the South to the North,
Speaker 3: that was a huge significant movement of American people because of conditions in the South and the prospects and hopes that you have when you have the big Northern migration.
Speaker 3: You think about the Okies and Arkies that left the big Dust Bowl period and came across Route 66.
Speaker 3: All the human stories and all those things, they're very understandable you don't have to go to find a foreign reason for people to come here.
Speaker 3: The difference, I think, in some of the things we do in immigration is that we actually set rules in a national policy,
Speaker 3: deciding who can come and who cannot come. So I just want to go a little bit further in this issue. One of the things we did in the 1882 foundation,
Speaker 3: the reason we got formed was because we organized a group nationwide to try and get Congress to apologize or acknowledge that they did wrong in the 1882 Act.
Speaker 3: There was nothing more- it was so fundamentally racist,
Speaker 3: it basically said "if you're a Chinese, you cannot come to the United States except on the- except for a couple of exceptions, and you could not become an American citizen only because you're a Chinese".
Speaker 3: My- in immigration records that I saw in San Bruno from my mother, big files like that,
Speaker 3: the one document, the final document that said "Cause for Exclusion: Alien is a person of the Chinese race and therefore ineligible to become an American."
Speaker 3: And signed by the San Francisco district director at the immigration department that time it was the department of labour.
Speaker 3: But the issue for us is that these things have happened in the past.
Speaker 3: In 1882 project, we got Congress to apologize basically for having passed those laws.
Speaker 3: And the question comes forth: why do we want to do that? It's something that was rescinded, happened over 130 years ago.
Speaker 3: Chinese Americans are almost the model minority to come up here, the laws about race aren't there anymore.
Speaker 3: Why do this? And the answer is the stock answer you have.
Speaker 3: We need to do this so that Congress can learn from its past.
Speaker 3: We cannot build a future we do not understand the past, we don't want to re-remo, we don't want to repeat the past mistakes.
Speaker 3: But I would say that there is another issue- there is a deeper way to understand that.
Speaker 3: I think that the criticism we got during the 1882 project was that I don't want to talk about the past, I want to talk about the future.
Speaker 3: Yeah, there was mistakes, but let's build forward together.
Speaker 3: I think you still need to pass these types of laws, whether it's an apology for slavery, or the Japanese internment, or for the roundup of the Native Americans, you have to pass it.
Speaker 3: And there's actually only four apologies were passed. Native Americans, internment, something about slavery, something about the Native Americans and the Chinese Americans.
Speaker 3: The issue there, not that we are trying to apologize, single out the past and single out the victims of past laws so that we don't repeat it for the next decade.
Speaker 3: The next- whether that's the Sikh Americans, the Filipino Americans, the Japanese internment or the Mexican Americans today, or Muslims.
Speaker 3: The reason you pass it is because you have Congress, and we got Congress to pass these legislations by unanimous vote and the Senate and the House.
Speaker 3: Two separate actions unanimously. It's quite remarkable at the time where people don't even talk to each other.
Speaker 3: And the reason you pass it because you made the issue was not an immigration issue. The issue was a civil rights issue.
Speaker 3: And what does it mean to be an American? And what- by passing these type of laws you force Congress, who represents all the Americans,
Speaker 3: and has to respond to the constituents and say we need to spend time in Congress to pass these laws because by passing them you- or these apologies,
Speaker 3: you use a standard that says, "I reaffirm our founding principles (the 14th Amendment)." That reaffirmation is for all Americans.
Speaker 3: It's not just for the victims of that period. So, it is a very forward-looking policy.
Speaker 3: You saying that we might've forgot it sometime but here in 2011 and 2012, we reaffirm the Constitution and our founding principles.
Speaker 3: That's for all of us that affects all Americans. But I would say that that kind of apology goes one step further.
Speaker 3: You can- you apologize for being American, but if I ask you guys, or you, or these people if- do you know what your past is?
Speaker 3: If you don't know what your past is what your history was if you are denied that history, if you don't know about these laws, a portion of you is missing.
Speaker 3: Right? You're allowing someone else to tell you what is important in the history that made you, and you and you.
Speaker 3: That is a civil right, that's a civil rights issue.
Speaker 3: I should know, I should know my history I should be allowed to hear my history.
Speaker 3: The school should not exclude it whether they do it purposely or our societies and our communities should not do it because they're just ignorant.
Speaker 3: They just don't know. We need to tell the people, and it should be us to tell it. We need to tell it in our own words.
Speaker 3: So we can say that not somebody else is telling me what I am and who I am. I will tell myself and I will make the decision what is important to me, and to do that we have to know our history.
Speaker 3: We have to confront our history. Right? So, that's what- that's a sort of thought.
Speaker 2: Thank you. Other comments?
Speaker 1: Yeah um- just three things. Um, migration and immigration are not an easy subject.
Speaker 1: And that said uh we need to educate ourselves we need to educate ourselves and knowing that there is no line that immigrants can go to.
Speaker 1: And just apply for citizenship status. It's not like that. It's very complicated.
Speaker 1: And get ourselves educated in all of the programs that the U.S. implements for immigrants, for undocumented folk, for refugees and how they work.
Speaker 1: And that each time they implement something that it's not necessarily a victory because like we learned from the refugee program it only benefits the elite and when it comes to undocumented folk there's a program that is called DACA which it gives,
Speaker 1: uh, a work permit and a social security number for undocumented youth.
Speaker 1: That came without them knowing that they were coming into the United States. But still those programs don't benefit the large population of undocumented folk and the it doesn't fix the refugee problems that we have.
Speaker 2: So they're temporary? DACA is temporary?
Speaker 1: And DACA is very temporary. It's only for two years and every time it expires you have to reapply and you have to pay a lot of money to get that kind of documentation back.
Speaker 1: So, it doesn't benefit anybody.
Speaker 1: And in order to get yourself educated again or my last- the last uh piece of advice that I had for you guys, is to get more involved in the community work with local non-profits that are doing this work.
Speaker 1: Talk to folk who are affected by these issues and try to see how you can get involved. If it's financially, if it's helping them with any resources or any kind of information that you may have. So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, um. It's kind of a hard question. um, there's a couple of things.
Speaker 1: One thing I want to point out is that both immigration, refugee policy, the push factors, we are still recovering from a lot of the pain and suffering of the Cold War throughout the world.
Speaker 1: My family, the Civil War in Ethiopia was part of the Cold War for Salvadorians, Nicaraguans.
Speaker 1: It's not that these conflicts wouldn't have happened, but would they have been sustained to such a level with so many arms and these kind of things escalating and pushing hundreds of thousands of millions of people out of multiple countries.
Speaker 1: It, it would not have been at this level And that's a direct part of the vestiges of U.S. foreign policy and Russian foreign policy and other actors.
Speaker 1: And so that stuff doesn't go away. I went to Ethiopia for the first time in 1994.
Speaker 1: That was 2 years after the war ended, and you could still see the impact of that in so many places.
Speaker 1: You could still see um, you know, bullet holes in the, it was just like,
Speaker 1: so, I empathize so much, particularly with Central Americans in part with my experience working with that community here in DC and also because I know what it feels like, I know what it's like for that to be your family, um, and so we have to very much keep that in mind.
Speaker 1: Um, both in what we advocate for in immigration policy but also how foreign policy will end up impacting immigration policy in the future. The other point is,
Speaker 1: I just want to explicitly say this, immigration issues are black issues also.
Speaker 1: I'm black and my parents always raised me to be very, like, thankful and grateful for the sacrifices that a lot of communities made.
Speaker 1: I'm learning about the history of organizing that the Chinese American community has done and also for the black community that's helped open the doors for us to come here as immigrants after the 1960s.
Speaker 1: And um, in any part of the immigration discussion, there are black issues.
Speaker 1: In the travel ban that affected Sudan and Somalia, also, those are black countries and so that visibility isn't always acknowledged when folks are talking about immigration and that needs to be acknowledged and explicitly states also.
Speaker 1: That also related to policing. I grew up in a black and brown community, so that extends where the criminal justice system is often a mechanism for putting predominantly young man into immigration detention and other things for very minor offences, like in Brooklyn jumping a turnstile on the subway.
Speaker 1: So we have to also make sure that we keep that in mind and be inclusive and continue to frame immigrants for who and what we are.
Speaker 2: Right, on that note, for those of you who don't know, undocumented black immigrants are disproportionately deported in relationship to other immigrants and the reason for that is because they are stopped more frequently by the police for jumping the turnstile,
Speaker 2: and thus their intersection with racial profiling in the United States and their immigration status leads them to be disproportionately deported.
Speaker 2: So this is a very kind of crystal-clear intersection of race and immigration status. Okay, um, a couple, does anybody have questions? Anything you want to know about? Yes.
[SILENCE] =
Speaker 2: So the question is, how? How- maybe what does it look like, the intersection of the black community with immigration issues? Since, when we talk about immigration, it's often as if we are excluding black people. So what is the question [??]
Speaker 1: Uh, okay. Well, I think part of how you do it is, is, what- number one, be inclusive, having people like me on discussions like this. I think it's something that's largely, in my opinion, from outside of the black immigrant community and black communities. I think if I'm walking down the street, I grew up here in the United States, I'm very happy and I am, I identify as black, as do my parents and my family. I think that that not acknowledging black immigrants as immigrants is- how do I put it? Like, I grew up where I grew up as a housing discrimination, not necessarily because of anti-immigrant discrimination, but because in Austin it was very difficult for black families to get a home West of the highway. So I think, and I do work at an immigrant civil rights organization and uh, or a Latino civil rights organization that's very involved in immigration issues. when we talk about some of the things that I was saying, policing in communities, housing discrimination, quality education, I think it's, to be honest, more incumbent on the immigrants rights organizations to make sure they're inclusive of that? And then I would also- yeah I think it's more- I think it's more on the communities that are doing immigrants organizing to be sure to be inclusive of that, to talk about that then it is particularly on us to be visible. I always say I'm a first-generation American. I'm Black.
Speaker 2: So there's an assumption in the question. That there are people who are immigrants coming in and there's the white group of people. It is how you would define what is American, right? So you need to look at that assumption first. And in immigration policy and how you [??] that in actually separate is another issue.
Speaker 2: Ok, unfortunately, we're out of time, if- I know we're out of time, I'm sorry. If you have a burning question, we're going to be off to the side, you can come and approach us, we'll be happy to talk to you for a few minutes. Thank you so much for joining us, stay tuned for the next panel. You were supposed to put that
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: You were supposed to put that one.
Speaker 1: Oh. =
[SILENCE] =
[Music plays]
[[Silence]]